Thomas and Uma are lifelong supporters of
a major political party in their country.
After five years together,
they have their first child, Ben.
They invite their friends and family to a
ceremony where the baby’s hand is painted
in the party colour and
pressed against a ballot paper.
The assembled company cheers its approval
and a minister joyfully announces
that their political party has just
gained its newest member.
There’s a photographic frenzy to capture
this wonderful moment in Ben’s life.
Year after year, Ben will be taken to weekly
meetings in which he’ll be made to listen
to speeches and sing songs
praising the party leadership.
Each week, Ben will made to join in with a
election ritual, lining up at a booth
and voting publicly for the party,
then sipping celebratory champagne.
The same messages will be drilled into Ben
as facts over and over and over and over again.
The party leader is always right.
Those who rebel against the leader
will suffer terrible consequences.
Only devoted members will enjoy a good life.
The messages will be further reinforced when
Ben is sent to a conviction school
with curriculums designed to keep the students’
political convictions in line with the party ideology.
At school, as with all other public spaces,
he will be made to wear party colours.
As his reasoning skills develop, some of what
Ben hears about the leader will seem nonsensical
contradictory
even hypocritical.
At first, he’ll voice these problems unselfconsciously.
But he’ll be reminded that the party is
perfect, so his criticisms must be wrong.
He’ll further be accused of ‘sacrilege’ and
warned of harsh consequences for such talk.
Ben will feel guilty, scared and isolated.
Critical thoughts about his party
will now arouse anxiety in him.
He’ll learn to dismiss his misgivings
as the product of his own ignorance.
Before long, he’ll learn
to block them out altogether.
Conversely, he’ll learn
that compliance gets rewarded.
When he does as he’s told, affirms his political
loyalty, raises funds for the party, and so on
he’ll be showered with approval and praise,
strongly encouraging more of the same behaviours
and deepening his sense of identity
as a party member.
In his thirteenth year,
in a special public ceremony
Ben will confirm his lifelong commitment
to the party leadership
promising always to campaign and vote for the party
and affirming that he makes these vows
entirely of his own free will.
Thomas and Uma will look on with pride,
thrilled that their son made the right choice.
They will genuinely believe
they gave their son a choice.
I suspect very few of us would have any difficulty
recognising this hypothetical scenario as abusive.
I suspect that if politicians tried to encourage
this kind of childhood induction into their parties
there would be huge public outrage.
So why is it that many of us will accept all
of the above abuse when it comes to religion?
The induction of babies as party members.
The manipulation of children through endlessly
repeated promises, threats, rhetoric and rituals
they’re are not equipped to evaluate or resist.
The further encroachment on children through
schools, which should be places of education.
Not proselytisation.
How is it possible to hold two such wildly
conflicting sets of attitudes
towards the same phenomenon of child indoctrination?
Protective toward the child in regard to politics.
Protective toward the indoctrinator in regard to religion.
Child religious indoctrination stands out
as one of the most systematic, self-perpetuating
forms of abuse humans perpetrate on others.
I want to go through some of the arguments
put to me over the years by its defenders.
With each one, I invite the viewer to reflect
on how legitimate that argument would seem
if it was submitted in support of Ben’s
political indoctrination.
I’ll also be presenting a thought experiment
that might help bring the point home.
Over the years, some apologists have argued
that ‘indoctrinate’ is just another word for teach.
Well, open a dictionary and yes, under ‘indoctrinate’
you’ll find the verb’s archaic definition
of ‘teach or instruct’.
But the modern usage means to teach someone
to accept a set of beliefs uncritically
which is a very different business.
And it’s the business religious indoctrinators are in
where religious beliefs are taught to children as truth
deeply colouring their view of reality
and where reactions to criticism
range from expressions of disapproval
to physical punishments
to threats of eternal damnation.
Religious indoctrination
actively encourages ignorance
unlike teaching which encourages knowledge.
For example, it discourages the investigation
of competing religions.
Some children are simply not told
about their existence.
Some will hear competing religions
explicitly denounced as corrupt
and will be forbidden to talk about them.
Obviously, if children were taught without
bias about all religions from the get-go,
they might not be so easily herded into the
one laid out for them.
To those who want to characterise religious indoctrination as teaching,
imagine a school where the drama teachers
only ever discuss the works of Harold Pinter
to the exclusion of all other playwrights;
where the music teachers proclaim
Sergei Prokofiev as the true composer
dismissingany others as corrupt;
where the maths teachers threaten to behead
students who draw cartoons of Blaise Pascal.
Would you call that teaching?
More to the point,
would you send your child there?
Indoctrinate does not just mean teach.
Indoctrinators sometimes claim they’re
performing a service for the child.
I’ve had christian apologists tell me they’re ....
‘helping the child find its christian identity.’
Paints a philanthropic picture doesn’t it?
It's as if there’s some precious christian identity
hidden deep inside the child
that it’ll struggle to find by itself.
So the indoctrinator kindly steps in to offer assistance.
But what would we think of political indoctrinators
who claimed they were ....
‘helping the child find its Democrat identity’?
Or ‘its Conservative identity?’
Would it seem like they were doing
the child a service —or themselves?
What if adults said they were ....
‘helping the child find its accountant identity’?
.... ‘its heterosexual identity’?
.... ‘its violinist identity’?
.... ‘its stamp-collector identity’?
We don’t ‘help children find their identity’
by imposing identities on them of our choosing.
We help by exposing them to the rich variation
and complexity of human life
educating them about all their options,
and letting them discover their own identity.
Indoctrination is not act of philanthropy.
Neither is it an act of love.
On the 2nd of February 2015,
going home from school
a six-year-old boy from Missouri was reportedly
coaxed into a pickup truck by a 23-year-old man.
According to news accounts, the boy was
then told he’d never see his family again
and would be ‘nailed to the wall of a shed’
— and threatened with a gun
when he wouldn’t stop crying.
When they reached their destination, the boy was
reportedly tied up, taken to a basement
partially stripped by a woman, and told
he could be sold into ‘sex slavery’.
The twist?
The woman was his aunt.
The man was her co-worker.
Together with the boy’s mother and grandmother,
they felt the boy was too trusting around strangers.
So they staged the kidnapping to teach him
not to talk to people he didn’t know.
When the boy told a teacher about his experience,
he was taken into protective custody.
A lawyer representing the adults
stated that their actions ....
‘were born out [of] an intense
and sincere love for the child
and the desire to protect him from others
by teaching him to protect himself’
The adults were charged with various offences
including abuse of a child,
kidnapping and felonious restraint.
Some apologists cite their
personal fear for their child’s soul
as a justification for inspiring anxiety
and terror in their children
with threats of exclusion from paradise and
banishment to a realm of unending torture.
Both the Missouri abduction defence and this
religious indoctrination defence
show how over-protective feelings
can easily lead to destructive actions,
when individuals become so fixated
on averting some perceived danger
that they don’t consider what damage
they themselves might be doing in the process.
It’s not a loving act to hold a child
so tight you crush its bones.
In the case of both the Missouri abduction
and religious indoctrination
alternative non-abusive courses of action exist.
The Missouri abductors could have
used role-play games
getting the boy to fend off
various approaches by strangers.
They could’ve taught him a code word
only given to trusted strangers.
They could’ve asked for advice from teachers,
psychologists, child protection agencies,
even the police.
A range of non-abusive options were available.
Likewise, indoctrination isn’t
the only option available
if you want to convince your child
of your religious beliefs.
A non-abusive alternative is simple argumentation.
Let your child learn about all religions
— and the option of choosing none.
Teach it without preference. Take it to a range
of services conducted by different religions.
Take it to a humanist assembly to show that
fellowship isn’t the exclusive province of religions.
Let your child learn about logic and logical fallacies;
about syllogistic reasoning;
about soundness and validity.
Give it practice to build its competence
and confidence in legitimate argumentation.
Let your child learn about manipulation through
emotional appeals and displays of raw conviction
so that it learns to see through to the substance
of the underlying claims.
Teach it about all the psychological
biases we humans possess
that can affect the way
we process information and ideas.
In short, do everything you can to help equip
your child with critical thinking skills
and immunise it against exploitation.
Then make your case for your religion.
Have an honest exchange with your child
presenting all the reasons
you think it should believe what you believe.
And now comes the important part.
Let your child think for itself.
Those who’re confident they have good reasons
for their religious beliefs
should have no problem using argumentation
instead of indoctrination.
Those who’re not confident they have good reasons
shouldn’t be contemplating indoctrination
or argumentation.
Their best plan is to try and figure out why they
themselves hold beliefs they can’t substantiate.
Many argue that religious indoctrination teaches
the child moral values.
This instantly falls flat on its face, when we ask:
Can children be taught moral values without indoctrination?
The answer is yes.
To justify indoctrination as an acceptable method
of teaching moral values,
the apologist would have to show that the invasive and coercive tactics used in indoctrination
were necessary to get the job done.
The fact these tactics are not necessary
makes them excessive.
Now, that’s all I actually need to say to debunk this defence.
But, like indoctrination, I’m going to be excessive.
I want to take a deeper look at this claim
of teaching moral values.
The stamp of divine authorship often gets
tacked on to precepts like:
‘don’t lie’, ‘don’t steal’,
‘treat others as we would be treated’.
But these rules of thumb all have secular roots.
They work because they offer ideas
on personal boundaries and personal bonding
that help social creatures co-exist.
I call them rules of thumb —not ‘moral absolutes’
as dogmatic religions like to present them —
because the fact is they shouldn’t always be followed.
Lying can be a moral act
where it protects people from persecution.
Even the golden rule doesn’t always hold.
If I enjoy confrontations, it doesn’t mean I should
go round treating others in a confrontational way.
Religions are not the source of any moral value,
but frequently the source of immoral ones.
In Christianity’s Bible, we find the
christian creator god Yahweh
depicted ordering execution for picking up sticks on the wrong day, and for sons who resist their parents.
Humans are instructed to burn to death any
priest’s daughter who becomes a sex worker;
and to stone to death any woman shown not
to be a virgin on her wedding night.
Biblical punishments range from the overblown
to the inadequate to the bizarre
such as stoning an ox to death for goring a human.
Throughout history, humans’ve been killed in excessively sadistic ways
by groups ranging from drug cartels
to religious communities to governments
as a warning to others.
But what can the stoning of an ox
teach the ox community?
This is bloodlust.
A very human phenomenon.
A very Biblical phenomenon.
But not a moral one.
It’s been put to me that
belief in gods is in itself a moral value
because it adds the weight of supernatural authority to moral instruction
helping to ensure the individual’s moral compliance.
But belief in gods adds weight
to any instruction —moral or immoral.
Instructions to withhold
medical treatment from children.
Instructions to mutilate their genitals.
Beliefs that help to ensure compliance to any instruction
have no intrinsic moral value.
In defending indoctrination, some people cite
the sincerity of their beliefs.
The argument posits that
if someone believes something sincerely
then they should be free to act
in accordance with that belief.
For those who don’t quite grasp it,
let’s see the principle in action.
Vivian gets a job at a bank.
On her first day, she refuses to serve Asian customers.
When they complain to her manager that they want her sacked,
Vivian reveals that she believes Asians are
an inferior slave race who don’t deserve money.
Her manager is outraged.
But then Vivian tells him her beliefs are sincere
and have been held by her family for generations.
Hearing this, he suddenly realises
there’s no problem after all.
Vivian keeps her job and her manager puts up
a sign by her desk saying ‘No Asians’
so she’ll never be put in this awkward position again.
Make sense now?
This is the kind of convoluted
nonsense you get into
when beliefs are indulged
on the basis of sincerity rather than content.
‘Sincerely held beliefs’ has become
a buzz-phrase in religious discourse
designed to bypass objections to unreasonable,
selfish and abusive behaviours.
But it has no more substance than the plea
of the child who complains to its parent
‘But I really want it!’
Some apologists claim indoctrinated children remain ‘free to think’.
Some of them reject
the power of indoctrination altogether
suggesting ‘children will grow up
to believe what they want anyway’.
How disingenuous can you get?
Indoctrinators know full well that if they succeed
in dominating the child’s mind in the first few years
there’s every chance the beliefs they implant will stick.
It’s spelled out in the familiar vow attributed to both
Aristotle and Jesuit missionary Francis Xavier:
‘Give me a child until he is seven
and I will show you the man.’
This statement shows a clear understanding
that these first few years
offer an opportunity like no other.
In these early years, children are developing
their conceptual models of how the world works.
If ideas are injected at this stage,
they’ll stand a great chance
of becoming an essential part
of how the individual views reality.
Injecting ideas in a child’s mind is child’s play.
All kinds of outlandish stories can be presented
as fact by adults — and they’ll be believed
with the total trust typical of infancy.
Freedom to think requires the ability to think;
to appraise what you’re told.
Very young children are incapable of this.
Evidence that they’re later becoming capable
comes when they starts asking awkward questions
showing they’re not merely swallowing
what they’re being handed
but beginning to process the material critically.
But as I’ve already noted, indoctrination
demands uncritical acceptance.
These questions are not welcomed
and indoctrinators use a range of power-based manipulations and punitive measures to silence them
— including warnings about ‘blasphemy’.
These induce guilt and anxiety in the child
and very effectively stop thought.
So much for being ‘free to think’.
Having groomed the child’s mind to accept
the religious ideology
the indoctrinator can now exploit a well-documented human quirk: the desire for consistency.
I explore this phenomenon in depth
in my video ‘bending truth’.
Humans have a powerful aversion to contradictions.
When we experience two conflicting beliefs or ideas
one will have to be distorted or
denied in some way to resolve that conflict.
And unfortunately, research shows the outcome
has little to do with a concern for truth.
What we strive for is consistency.
And when we have a heavy personal investment
in one of the contradictory ideas
the outcome is loaded from the start.
The police knock at Karen’s door. They’ve come
to arrest her son on several counts of murder.
Karen is faced with two contradictory ideas.
Her son’s alleged guilt and her belief in his innocence.
We could think of these ideas like boxes.
Karen has a ton of investment in the innocent box.
Years of complex memories and experiences
and intense feelings of love and protectiveness.
In contrast, she has no investment in the guilty box.
Karen doesn’t know any details yet,
but dismisses the whole thing as police incompetence.
She knows her son.
Karen’s sure she can provide an alibi.
But when she looks through her calendar she sees
her son was out on hunting trips with a friend
on all of the murder dates.
She puts it down to coincidence.
In court, a victim who got away
identifies her son as his attacker.
But she knows the man’s lying or mistaken.
She knows her son.
Various videos are found on her son’s computer
in which he appears with his hunting buddy
who’s seen torturing and killing animals.
Karen is shocked, but it’s obviously
all down to her son’s friend.
Then more videos are found. Both boys are
clearly seen torturing and killing the murder victims
and laughing at their work.
Karen can’t make sense of what she’s seeing.
But she knows there must be some explanation.
She knows her son.
When we become heavily invested in a belief,
we don’t just happily give it up
when we’re faced with inconsistent facts.
We’re much more likely
to reject the facts to preserve our belief.
Hence the Jesuits’ confident assertion.
Indoctrination installs an ideology in the
child’s brain
with muscular connections to major areas of its life,
including its sense of identity at every level
—self, family, community, for some nationality.
The child will then automatically defend this ideology against any conflicting ideas,
without even knowing why.
In fact, indoctrination conditions the child
with a gamut of reflex responses.
Automatic, knee-jerk emotions, attitudes
and behaviours that aren’t even consciously processed.
Responses like automatic compliance, denial,
anxiety, guilt, fear, judgements about other groups.
An indoctrinated child is no more ‘free to think’
than a child whose parents have convinced it there are invisible monsters waiting for it outside the house
is free to walk out the front door.
Some of us do manage to break the psychological hold of the ideologies thrust on us in childhood
often because some conflicting idea has managed to work its way through our defences
and, like a pebble in a shoe,
we can’t quite shake it loose.
When we look to our ideology for answers,
we start noticing flaws we never spotted before.
They begin to multiply.
Before we know it, the ideology is cracking apart.
Then flying apart.
In regard to my own experience of this, I’ve often said
it was like throwing a rock through a spider’s web.
The foundations of reality were ripped apart
leaving me in a state of limbo.
It can take time to recover
from such all-encompassing disillusionment.
But, when eventually we feel ready to face the task
of rebuilding our world piece by piece
there are consolations.
We get the chance to lay better foundations
replacing dogmatic certainty,
mindless compliance and emotional thinking
with honest doubt,
mindful resistance and critical thinking.
Some of us will even get to see our own children
grow up unshackled by indoctrination
leaving them genuinely free to think.
When assessing whether an activity is abusive or not
it’s sometimes difficult to get outside
our habitual ways of thinking.
Sometimes an abuse has become so normalised
that even if part of us understands intellectually
the injustice of what’s being described,
somehow we just can’t get worked up about it.
Certain thought experiments can sometimes
give us an insight into our rationalisations
even if only a brief glimpse.
One of them is the veil of ignorance, proposed by
moral and political philosopher John Rawls.
He suggested a hypothetical scenario
where we exist outside of a society
and have to decide what kinds of
governing principles we’d be prepared to accept.
These might focus on divisions of labour,
allocation of resources, the granting of rights.
The catch is that we don’t know what attributes
we’ll have when we enter that society
— what sex, skin colour, nationality,
natural abilities, inherited wealth, and so on.
They’re hidden behind the veil of ignorance.
What this does is remove our self-interest.
Any personal meaning we might’ve attached
to these features is stripped away.
Rawls suggested that a just society was one
that we’d be prepared to enter at random.
So. I invite the viewer to imagine
the following two societies.
Society A and society B each contain
the same range of religions.
There are sikhs, hindus, buddhists, wiccans,
christians, jews, muslims, and so on.
There are the same denominations we see
in our world today, from moderate to fundamentalist.
‘Christian’ could mean Amish, Mormons,
Jehovah’s Witnesses and so on.
Society A runs on childhood indoctrination.
Here, children are considered members
of their parents’ religion at birth.
They’re taught to accept this religion as the truth
which in the overwhelming majority of cases
will result in their lifelong allegiance.
Meanwhile, society B runs on childhood education.
Here, children are informed about all religions
without preference or manipulation
and left to decide which — if any — they wish to join.
In which of these two societies would you
be more comfortable being randomly born
to parents of any religious group?
The veil of ignorance removes self-interest.
It actually does so simply by reminding us
how every single one of us came into this world.
We didn’t choose characteristics
like our sex, skin colour, nationality.
Something else we didn’t choose was our religion.
But unlike the characteristics I’ve just mentioned,
we should’ve had control of this one.
But that control gets taken away from us when
we’re assigned the religion of our parents at birth
and taught to accept its ideology as truth.
We then develop a deep familiarity,
connection and loyalty to that religion.
And we forget how utterly arbitrary it was that
we happened to be born to parents of this religion.
We may even think how lucky we were
to be born to parents of the true religion
and not to parents of any of those
other false religions.
Child indoctrination is an act of subjugation
colonising a human brain
in its most impressionable state
with an ideology it’s simply not equipped to process.
An ideology that’ll extend a far reach over the child’s life — even down to choice of life partner.
signing up to such ideologies
needs to be a matter of informed consent
not power-based child coercion that
bypasses consent, generation after generation.
We wouldn’t abide it in politics.
We shouldn’t abide it in religion.
We need to put an end
to this inexcusable practice of grooming minds